<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 class="nobreak">XXIV</h3>
			<p>The first lilac gloom of night had fallen on the city ere the old<span class="pagenum" id="Page_155">[Pg 155]</span> beggar regained the vault of NГ»r. A feeble glow from the brazier showed his wrinkled face ghastly pale and distorted with nervous twitchings. Madness burned in his eyes. His fingers clenched and unclenched spasmodically; his staff fell from them with a thud upon the earthern floor.</p>
			<p>вҖңO NГ»r, hear me! Where art thou?вҖқ he cried, peering about in the darkness. вҖңI have slain him, I tell theeвҒ вҖ”I have slain the pig вҖҷhannaвҒ вҖ”the enemy of my house.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңHist!вҒ вҖ”Hold thy peace!вҖқ The door of the upper chamber was opened and shut. There was the rustle of a dress and clank of trinkets as the old woman came down the steps. вҖңShe is up there: his daughter, dost understand? SaГҜd has been with her, but against my advice he was violent and frightened her. She fought like a tigress and screamed so that I had to interfere. By my head, it is lucky that my house is a place apart, walled off and secluded, else all the quarter must have come together, seeking the cause of her outcry. For long I have been trying to soothe her; now at length she is silent and I am glad of it. As for SaГҜd, she has scratched and bitten him finely. A little while since he went out to gather tidings; he will return presently. Now sit down, O my uncle, and I will warm up thy supper, which was ready long ago.вҖқ</p>
			<p>But Mustafa gave no heed to what she said. Except that he lowered his voice somewhat it seemed that he heard nothing of it. Clutching her arm, he launched into a sort of chant of praise and thanksgiving.</p>
			<p>вҖңAllah is bountiful!вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ I slew him, I tell thee! He lay on his bed shamming sickness; and I held the rage of the faithful in check till he had whispered me the secret of his treasure. He<span class="pagenum" id="Page_156">[Pg 156]</span> thought to preserve his life thereby, deeming we were come to rob him. But I spoke the word, I called on the name of Allah! I shouted in his ear the name of the girl, my sister, whom he ruined. A hundred knives struck down at him as he lay; but mine was foremost and it cut his life.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Praise to Allah!</p>
			<p>вҖңHa, ha! He was fat and lay on a soft bed, whereas I am lean and used to sleep on the earth. Yet I slew him!вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ See the stains on my left handвҒ вҖ”O hand of honour, O blessed hand!вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ The fat who dwell in palaces must reckon with the lean beggar at their gates. I would, O NГ»r, thou hadst seen him in the death-throe. He looked so funny that all men laughed. Ha, ha, ha!вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Thanks be to Allah! The reproach is taken away from my fatherвҖҷs house. Allah is gracious!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңThou art overwrought, O father of MansГ»r,вҖқ she said soothingly. вҖңSit down and rest. See, thy supper is ready!вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ By Allah, thou art very old for this work, and I fear lest it prove harmful to thy health. Sit down, dost hear me? After a little while SaГҜd will return and we shall learn what news there is. In the meantime I will make some coffee for thee.вҖқ</p>
			<p>The old beggar allowed himself to be persuaded. He sank down cross-legged by the threshold of the inner room, while she, having made fast the door, shook an earthen lamp to be sure it had oil enough, lit and set it in a hollow nook of the wall opposite to him. By its light she observed him furtively as she busied herself about the brazier, and she shook her head bodingly from time to time. A torn strip of his filthy turban dangled over one ear. His scanty robe, all ragged, displayed the thick growth of grizzled hair upon his chest. His bare limbs were shrivelled and sinewy, of the colour of a sun-dried apricot, the legs dusty almost to the knee. His withered hand was extended as when he sat by the wayside for alms.</p>
			<p>It was as if mere change of posture had been a charm to quench his excitement. The life was gone from his limbs, the fire from his eyes. He was become bowed and very feebleвҒ вҖ”an old, old man whose hours are numbered. His mouth hung open slavering. The under lip moved perpetually us he gurgled certain<span class="pagenum" id="Page_157">[Pg 157]</span> phrases, always the same, seeming catchwords to something he would fain recall.</p>
			<p>вҖңAllah is bountiful.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ I slew him.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ DГ¬n Muhammed.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ O blessed left hand.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Allah is bountiful!вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>NГ»r shook him with rough kindness as she set a smoking bowl of chopped meat and rice at his knees with the charge to wake up and eat. She held the dish under his nostrils that the savoury steam might beget a craving. She grew poetical in praise of its contents; but all in vain.</p>
			<p>Mechanically he thrust a trembling hand into the mess and raised a portion to his mouth; but he let the rice slip through his fingers without so much as licking them.</p>
			<p>NГ»r was greatly concerned. He must be on the brink of death, she told herself, thus to neglect good victuals, he who was always wont to come in ravenous from a dayвҖҷs begging. She made shift to feed him with her own hands and rejoiced to find that he swallowed the morsels placed in his mouth.</p>
			<p>While she was thus occupied the door was tried from without.<!--Add missing period--> A knocking ensued, and the voice of SaГҜd calling to her to open. She left her charge and flew to shoot back the bolt.</p>
			<p>вҖңWhere is Mustafa?вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Bid him come away with all speed! It is said that search is made for us for our part in the destruction of YuhannaвҖҷs house. Ah, there he is! Rise, O my father, and come with me. The carnage of this day is nothing compared with what to-morrowвҖҷs sun will see. Know that a great multitude of Christians, fugitives from the Mountain, have entered the city seeking refuge. And many DrГ»z, both from the Mountain and the Hauran, have pursued them hither. I met a party of them in this minute as I came through the streets. They are strong men of war and armed like soldiers. They are eager as ourselves against the pagans.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Arise, O Mustafa, and come away! It is known that we frequent this place, and it were a shame to be taken a prisoner on the eve of so great a festival.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Arise, I say! What ails thee? Art ill? Speak! What is this, O NГ»r?вҖқ</p>
			<p>The woman clung to his arm.</p>
			<p>вҖңMerciful Allah! I fear he is at the point to die. At his first coming he was as one possessed, shouting and screaming and waving<span class="pagenum" id="Page_158">[Pg 158]</span> his hands. It was very hard for me to quiet him. Now he is like one in a swoon; he sees me not nor hears me, and is weaker than a baby.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңI warrant he is only tired. If Allah will I shall find means to rouse him. He is as my father, and this place is dangerous for him.вҖқ</p>
			<p>He strode to the place where Mustafa sat cross-legged, mumbling fragments of sentences, and staring at the basin of rice and meat. He grasped the old manвҖҷs shoulder and bent over him, raising his voice as if to overtake the wandering mind and call it back.</p>
			<p>вҖңFie upon thee, O my father!вҖқ he cried, вҖңthou who hast this day slain the enemy with thy own hand, and hast done battle so bravely for the Faith, to sicken and faint like a vaporous girl. Allah witness I am ashamed for thee! Awake, O Mustafa! This place is not safe for us. The soldiersвҒ вҖ”Allah blast them!вҒ вҖ”may be seeking us even now. If we stay here we shall be taken and put in prison, and must forego all the glory of to-morrowвҖҷs slaughter. The wrath of IslГўm burns like a great fire to consume the infidels. From the hour of sunrise the slaying will begin. Men will look for thee, O my father, in the front of the battle. They will marvel greatly and say one to another, вҖҳWhere now is that old lion which devoured Yuhanna, the pig?вҖҷ They will look for thee to lead them on; it were a sin to disappoint them. Up, O Mustafa! The danger grows with every minute. Awake!вҒ вҖ”yвҖҷAllah!вҒ вҖ”for the faith of Muhammed!вҖқ</p>
			<p>The last words were of magic virtue. The dying embers of the old manвҖҷs wit leapt up at them in lurid flame. With a cry he sprang to his feet, staring wild-eyed at SaГҜd.</p>
			<p>вҖңDГ¬n Muhammed!вҒ вҖ”I slew him! O glorious left hand! Allah is bountiful! Yes, I hear thee, my son, and I understand. I was asleep, not so? I was weary and so I fell asleep, and methought the angel of death was with me. But it was a dream surely. I will go with thee, O my eyes, whither thou wilt, so that there be men to killвҒ вҖ”fat men like him, who lie on beds of downвҒ вҖ”Ha, ha!вҒ вҖ”while I who slew him am used to lie on the hard-trodden ground. I must be strong, sayest thou? Now, by<span class="pagenum" id="Page_159">[Pg 159]</span> my beard, that is a foolish word; for who is stronger than Mustafa? вҖҷHanna was weaker for I slew him easily, witness Allah and the blood-stains on my left hand. O glorious hand! But it is true what thou sayest, that a manвҖҷs strength must be nourished with meat. Of course, I will eat; and to-morrow I will do great slaughterвҒ вҖ”thou and I together, O my soul. O blessed left hand! Allah is bountiful!вҖқ</p>
			<p>He swallowed the food hastily by great mouthfuls, with no signs of relish. When the bowl was empty NГ»r brought him a cup of hot coffee, which he gulped down in like manner. He grew reasonable, taking counsel with SaГҜd as to the best place for them to lie till morning. The old woman, seeing him fairly in the way of health, wished them both a happy night, and returned to the upper chamber to look after the girl Ferideh, whose moans and lamentations, though unheeded in the greater anxiety attending the beggarвҖҷs plight, had long been audible.</p>
			<p>вҖңTake care that she do herself no mischief: she is a very tigress!вҖқ SaГҜd called after her as he and his adopted father stepped out into the night. They went stealthily, by narrow ways the moonbeams seldom fathomed, to a small tavern kept by a Muslim, which was towards the Christian quarter. Others of the insurgents had likewise chosen that place for their nightвҖҷs shelter. There were blithe greetings. A discussion was going on, in which Mustafa, having no care to rest, joined eagerly. But SaГҜd, being very drowsy, yawned cavernously at all that was said. He soon stretched his length on the floor and fell fast asleep.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
